It meant to be a thought dump, so take it with a grain of salt. So the purpose of this project is to better understand how recommendation systems work for Spotify and especially music. Uh, so for me, at least, I'm very passionate about music, so I built this project meant as a way to kind of feed my curiosity about recommendation systems. And so the big picture of this project is, can we recommend songs for users so that they will stay on a song that is similar to songs they like for a longer duration of time? So one of the common patterns I see with Listeners of music who actually listen to a lot of music is within a few seconds, they are able to tell if a song is good or bad, such as if they like the song or not. And so the goal of this project is to see if maybe we can increase a user's retention on the song from ten seconds to twenty seconds or thirty seconds with the end goal of giving the user a better experience and having them stay on a song for a longer duration of time. And that's kind of the inspiration for this project.

So, the purpose of this blog post is just to detail kind of my thinking and, you know, why did I build the project in the direction that we have gone.

When I first started this project, the first thing I did was just spend a bit bit of time just understanding, like, you know, how do these recommendation systems work, and what are some common ways recommendation systems are built. So upon this is when I discovered that there are two main ways to do recommendation systems. One is a content based one, and the other one is to do collaborative filtering. Because I don't have the necessary user data, I opted to do content based filtering. And while I was building that system and just understanding how categories work for recommendation systems, the big, I guess, roadblock I ran into is I don't have any data. And this is what kind of inspired me to build this genre guessing game first. So the idea is we will have users kind of listen to songs and just kind of try to classify, like, you know, what genre does this song belong to. And the end goal of this is, you know, if we have enough guesses from users, then we are able to kind of predict similar songs in the search space. Right? And, you know, a cool thing is every time a user tries to guess a song, it not only saves the genres of the songs classified as, but it also saves the amount of time a user spent trying to guess the song. And the point of these metrics are pretty self explanatory. The first one is to just help us understand, hey. What do users think the song actually is? You know, is this more of a hip hop song, or is it more of a R and B song? The second metric, which is the amount of time the user takes to guess, is meant to help us understand, you know, how long does it take to understand what kind of song it is.

The second metric of determining how long the user takes to guess is not perfect, I think for now it suffices its job. So the ultimate goal is once we have enough data, and then we can see how long a user takes the guess, can we try to, you know, recommend them a song that allows them to stay longer. Right? because the end goal of this at the... or the big picture of the project is, how can we kind of have users stay longer on a song with more enjoyability?

Ultimately, because I see myself as a domain expert of music, um, I will be the one determining if, you know, the song that the system recommends for a song that we skip in a short amount of time is a good fit or not.

One of the most interesting things I discovered while building this project is the idea of discovery notes. Um, how I see music at least is it's more or less a relationship between songs and artists with other songs and artists. Right? And what I mean by discovery note is songs and artists that are typically grouped close to each other in the search space tend to be of the same genre. Right? But there is a chance that a user discovers a song that is very different from the genre that they're guessing, but they also really enjoy. And I think these nodes are the coolest because it serves as a discovery node. It serves as a way to just create more unique relationships between, you know, a hip hop song and, you know, a classical piano piece. Right? It... these are the type of nodes that actually allow recommendation systems to be good and recommend songs that are nontrivial for users.
